CHAPTER 5: Using Documentation

There are many reasons to document violations against women human rights defenders, and activists use that documentation in any number of creative ways. Generally, activists use documentation as a tool to “seek justice” after a harm has been done.

Telling a story supported by facts can generate public outrage and protest about a human rights situation. It can create a specific change in someone’s circumstances or in a policy. It can mobilise solidarity locally, nationally or internationally, thereby helping to build social movements and change social attitudes. It can ensure violations targeted at individuals and groups are never forgotten. And it can legitimise and validate the advocacy and social justice struggles of women human rights defenders around the world.

Many uses of documentation are directed at generating outcomes in legal arenas. In some situations, documentation helps defenders secure legal representation, which can be a critical early step necessary for a number of outcomes. In other situations, documentation of the experiences of WHRDs helps to challenge authorities who maintain their political, religious, familial or cultural control through invalidating or punishing activists—or women in general.

This chapter explains some of the more formal systems, or “mechanisms”^61 for accountability, justice and protection that exist for WHRDs at the national, regional and international levels. It does not present an exhaustive list, but provides a discussion of some of the key advocacy strategies that women human rights defenders may adopt—and use documentation to support—to respond to attacks and to overcome obstacles put in our paths because of our activism. The chapter that follows emphasizes human rights strategies that are somehow legal or more formal in nature and that
are connected to judicial or intergovernmental processes. These, of course, are not the only outcomes for the good uses of documentation on and by WHRDs, and legal outcomes often rest on and can contribute to other social movement advocacy.

• Part 1 of this chapter presents some guiding questions and creative ways that women human rights
defenders can use documentation to secure protection while at the same time creating public awareness and demanding change. Most of the initiatives described in this section pertain to actions
by and for civil society.

• Part 2 examines more formal advocacy including use of the courts, judicial systems and the
United Nations to seek justice and accountability at national, regional and global levels. This section addresses in detail documentation and advocacy with U.N. treaty bodies, “special procedures”^62 the Universal Periodic Review of the U.N. Human Rights Council, and regional human rights courts and commissions.

[^61]: The term human rights “mechanism” is generally meant to imply an official human rights “body” or “entity” that monitors or makes decisions about human rights situations. There are regional and global mechanisms, and most accept information from NGOs about human rights issues. In this section, “mechanism” also applies to national courts and other systems of justice.

[^62]: “Special procedures” is a term used in the U.N. and some regional governmental systems for various independent experts, often called special rapporteurs, and working groups. Their mandates are to report and advise on human rights situations in countries or based on themes or experiences of groups of people.

